I'm going to tell you guys a secret.
Water isn't as hydrating as you think.
I'll tell you how you know. Because
let's do an activity. Go train. Sweat
and then taste your sweat and tell me
what it's what it tastes like. I bet you
it doesn't taste like tap water.
What does it taste like to you? Salty.
That's because the fluids in your body
contain electrolytes. sodium, potassium,
magnesium.
And what we're trying to do is
rehydrate with tap water, which doesn't
have any of those electrolytes in it. So
therefore,
one of the best things that you can do
when you rehydrate is well, what I
normally do is salt.
I'll tell you what I normally do is this
stuff here. Just salt because it's
sodium, right? I mean, yeah, that's the
biggest thing that we need to be
replenishing. Your sweat tastes salty.
So, it's like, you know, you don't
replenish body fluids with tap water.
You replenish it with with transparent
labs,
electrolytes. That's what your sweat
should taste like. No, it doesn't taste
like that either, but anyway. So, this
is much more rehydrating than than just
more tap water. So, that's my favorite
pre-workout actually.
More than caffeine, more than all the
stimulants and all that stuff is proper
hydration. So that's what we're doing
today is we're in a rush.
We're in a really big rush because I've
got my seminar, my mentorship.
And before I started my mentorship, I
had to get a whole bunch of other work
done. And I've only got like 45 minutes
to get a training session in. So what
are we going to do? 45 minutes. Is that
long enough to get a training session
in? Well, it depends. It's not long
enough to have a proper strength
session. But what I'm going to do is
teach you guys
the rules according to science and how
you can still get effective training in
for muscle growth and strength building
if you are short on time and I'm going
to give you some of the science to back
it up. I'm still going to have a
session. I'm not going to go as heavy.
The main reason I'm not going to go as
heavy is because heavy training
takes me a long time to warm up to my
top sets. So, you know that I train for
strength, right? So, the rules for
strength are you kind of need to be
lifting heavy to get stronger.
How heavy? Well, 80% and plus is where
all the kind of research says has the
best carryover to strength. But that
doesn't mean that lighter doesn't carry
over
indirectly.
See, the larger your muscles, the
greater your strength potential, right?
So people say, "Are bodybuilders
strong?" Some people say they are. Some
people say they aren't. I tell you, they
absolutely are. They just don't practice
the skill of strength as frequently as
strength athletes.
Some of them do, like Ronnie Coleman is
incredibly strong, and every now and
then he would test heavy singles and
heavy doubles.
And
that wasn't really the biggest
contributor to his why he was as
muscular as what he is. The biggest
contributor was the amount of work that
he did as well as genetics as well as
special source. What I'm going to be
doing today isn't a typical strength
session.
It's a session on the fly. But I guess
the stimulus today is muscle growth or
hypertrophy.
So what are the rules with strength
versus hypertrophy? Well, when it comes
to percentage of max and how heavy you
should be training, as I said, strength
is 80% and plus or in other words, kind
of like 1 to six rep range. But muscle
hypertrophy,
which means building muscle is a lot
more flexible. So you don't need to be
doing any particular percentage.
So, according to the research, you can
do anywhere between five to 30 reps and
still achieve meaningful progress with
your muscle mass, like equal muscle
gain, regardless of the rep range, as
long as you take the sets to the same
proximity to failure. So, as close to
failure as possible, like even up to
failure.
But training to failure comes at a cost.
And that cost of training to failure is
pretty much fatigue. That's the biggest
one. A lot of people say if you train to
failure, you risk injury and all these
things. Well, kind of, but also kind of
not. You got to be lifting heavy enough
to kind of injure yourself. And it
depends on the exercise. Taking bicep
curls to failure, that's not really
going to injure you. Lat pull downs to
failure, not really going to injure you.
Big squats and deadlifts when you're
really strong, taking those things to
failure, yeah, that increases the risk
of injury. Sure.
But the idea of training to failure
is the closer to failure you get, the
more mechanical tension
you are creating on your muscle, which
is the main mechanism of building
muscle. Muscle hypertrophy is mechanical
tension.
And the way that you achieve that is
take it close to failure. How close kind
of
all of the best researchers in the space
kind of say anywhere between zero to
three reps in a verb is optimal. You can
still achieve mechanical tension with
four reps and five reps and more in
reserve, just not as much. So, the
guidelines for building muscle is kind
of like zero to two to three reps in
reserve is where you should be living.
That's how hard you should be training,
which is actually pretty hard. It sounds
like three reps in reserve, that's
really, really easy. Well, not really.
You still need to push pretty damn hard.
And that's what I'm going to be doing
today. So, the focus of today, I'm not
going to be doing my goal is actually
140 kg for high reps. Not because it's
percentages or anything like that,
because I know that 140 is pretty easy
for me to warm up to. That's like six
warm-up sets and I'm there
or less. So, I go 60, 80, 100,
120, and then we're on to 140. So, it's
a pretty quick to warm up to. I'm not
timing my rest sets in between. I'm just
kind of going back forth, back forth,
however long it takes me to load the
plates. I'll have a little bit longer
rest on my last warm-up set.
So, this is 100. Nice and easy.
It's winter here in Sydney, Australia.
So, it's kind of cold. So, we have the
heater on to get started, which is nice.
But then we get warm enough. So, this is
called opposing muscle group supersets
or non-over overlapping muscle supersets
or agonist antagonist superset. I don't
mind what you call it as long as you're
doing the same thing. Now, the beauty of
this is it allows me to get twice the
amount of work in the same amount of
time. Push, pull, push, pull, push,
pull. So, instead of doing your big
heavy bench press set and waiting
however many minutes you take to rest, I
take about 8 minutes.
Most people take about four to 5
minutes. Instead of just sitting there 4
to 5 minutes, sit there for 2 minutes,
do a set of pull, come back 2 minutes
later, and come back to your push again.
One more warm-up set and then we're
ready. So, get this, right? So, what
percentage of my max am I going to be
working at? Well, my current max that I
tested most recently was 210 kg. So,
what is what is 140 kg of 210? It's less
than 70% of my max is 60 something,
whatever that is, high 60s.
So that's going to really, you know,
according to the research, you need 80%
and plus for strength. But I'll tell you
right now,
this does still carry over to some
strength because the objective of this
is building muscle.
And the more muscle you build, the
greater your potential for strength
gain. So if all you do is strength reps
for your whole life, you're missing out
on some of the other physical qualities
that you can attain through the light
rep range work. So, you know, the
biggest thing that I'm going to be
looking at is like, you know, look at
the best bodybuilders in the world. How
do they train? And I know there's
examples of bodybuilders that lift
really, really heavy and low reps and
they get huge, like Dorian Yates, Mike
Metsner, and all those um guys who just
train as hard as they can with very low
volume.
But don't use those guys as an example
of that's how it's done. Those guys are
kind of like the outliers. They are
genetic freaks. Uh and yes, it is
possible to to build strength and muscle
from so many different styles of
training that al work differently to
each other. But most commonly, the rep
ranges that people use to build the most
amount of muscle at the highest level is
always kind of in between like six to 15
reps. So, no matter what the research
says, which says, you know, 5 to 30 reps
is all equivalent, look at how the best
are doing, and they're pretty much, you
know, six to 15 reps across the board.
One more warm-up set. Musty, I'm going
to get you to unrackck for me, please,
if that's okay with you.
Thank you.
Last warm up and then we're on 140. And
all I'm going to do today is bench
probably. Well, bench and that pull
down. Bench that pull down. Bench that
pull down. I'll go to maybe two sets cuz
I've got to be quick. Two high rep sets.
I reckon I reckon two sets of 15.
Two sets of 15 here.
Of course, I'm going to supererset that
with my lat pull downs.
The idea is to take them close to fail.
And I'll tell you now, it's not a lot of
sets,
but you saw how quick that session was.
Well, that's me up already warm. And now
I'm going to probably rest about 10
minutes between these sets as well. I'm
going to pump it out as hard as I can.
So, 15 reps is going to be really,
really hard. So, how many minutes rest
should you have between sets? Well, a
lot of the times with hypertrophy,
people say, you know, 2 to 3 minutes
rest. That's not how I do it. I can't do
a high rep set of this even though it's
hypertrophy stimulus and rest only 2 to
3 minutes. That is absolutely not a full
recovery for me. So for me whenever I'm
training hypertrophy I still take long
rest before sets. I'm going to do one
more set of that pull down.
Okay.
So, now my warmups are done. I'm going
to give myself about 2 minutes, maybe
three.
What?
That answers that question.
I thought that was going to be hard. Oh
man, good one. 15 reps on 140 is like,
of course, I should be there. I should
be able to do more. But I still come in
thinking, it's hard. But how many reps
in reserve did I have there?
Maybe.
Like, you know, the most I've done on
that recently is about 17 reps. I think
what happens is when I do my high rep
sets like that, it's just like smack it,
smack it, then all of a sudden it just
goes like hits a brick wall. But
definitely
had more than 17. I could have easily
done more than two more. 20. I don't
know. I've done 20 before when I was
bigger and fatter and stronger, but now
I'm only a skinny guy.
Man,
let's have a look.
That was a good unrackck, musty. Hey,
see this professional.
That was very comfortable. You know why
it was comfortable? You know the only
reason why it was easy? Cuz of the
unrackck.
I wouldn't have got it otherwise. That's
the power of having a good training
partner, you know. I would have failed.
>> Too many good on me, bro.
>> Yeah, it's all good. You deserve it,
bro. Just one more because I don't
really have much time.
So, I'm going to do that pull downs now.
I got to create a presentation for this
afternoon. I'm doing a presentation all
week. So, this is my mentorship where
I've got a week-l long semi-private
mentorship with a bunch of personal
trainers and strength coaches and all
that stuff. And we do Monday to Friday
from 10 to 4:00. And it's just
intensive. It's 50% of the work is just
theory on program design um and all
things coaching and the other 50% on
lifting. So today we're going to be
doing deadlifts. But anyway, so that's
going to start in about an hour. Now
when I finish that I've got to do
another presentation for my mentorship
group. So it's just non-stop. So before
this, I came in and I did bunch of
coaching straight into my training
session and then when I finish this, I'm
going to have a quick feed and do some
more coaching and then I'm going to do
the
the education for mentorship. But
anyway, I'm going to be very happy about
doing two sets of 15 reps of 140 where I
smoked it. And I'll tell you now, I
think it's an effective session. So the
last few weeks I wasn't doing any of
this style of benching. All I was doing
was the spotto pressing
to give myself a bit of a break from
heavy lifting,
which is another real great benefit from
understanding the research on
percentages
and how heavy you should be training and
all this stuff. So get this right. So 5
to 30 reps for hypertrophy,
right? So that's research paper by Dr.
Brad Shonfeld. It was a meta analysis,
which means a study of studies where
they found that didn't matter what rep
range you were choosing, anywhere
between 5 to 30 reps all the way up to
30 produce an equal amount of muscle
hypertrophy
as long as you're taking the set to the
same proximity to failure, which means
as close to failure as possible on all
of those rep ranges, they produce the
same amount of hypertrophy. So, this
defied even what he believed. What most
people used to say is, you know,
hypertrophy rep range is kind of like 8
to 12 or whatever it is. And anything
more than 15 is kind of cardio,
but he proved himself wrong, which is,
you know, it's humbling when you hear
the best researchers in the world. Like,
if he's wrong, he'll say he is. Uh, and
yeah, so that's what that research tells
us. Now, a lot of people sit there and
say that's wrong because 30 reps isn't
the optimal rep range of hypertrophy.
No, it's not. That's not what he's
saying. He's just saying that set by set
you can produce the same amount of
hypertrophy. Now, here's the thing. That
doesn't mean go and do sets of 30 on
your program. Unless, of course, there
are instances where you need to. So, for
example, like this. Okay, so that's sets
of 15. But, uh, that's my favorite way
of doing high rep sets is if I don't
have a long time to train.
When I'm doing high reps, it's it's a
lot lighter weight and I don't have to
take as long to warm up to that type of
weight. If I was to work to 200 kg for
my bench press, I'd probably have to do
well 140, 160, 180, 20. So, a few more
warm-up sets, which I start waiting, you
know, 8 minutes in between those sets.
So, that's three more sets. That's
another 20 or so minutes just to warm
up. And then
and then the next reason why so so for
if you're short on time, high rep sets,
you can still achieve great muscle
hypertrophy. The next thing is when you
go heavy all the time, I'll tell you
right now, that's kind of what I do a
lot is go heavy all the time, your
joints and tendons and and your body
just starts to hurt after a while,
right? So that's another great reason
for doing high rep work. There's some
people out there that say high rex high
reps are just dumb. What a waste of
time. You don't need to do high reps.
You can just lift heavy all the time and
do low reps. You know, I love the
sentiment because I'm very strength
biased as well. And I love lifting heavy
weights and I'll favor lifting heavy
weights. But I will tell you firsthand,
I'm 43 years old and I don't have and
I've never had any major injuries. I've
had minor tears here and there, but
everything I've been able to recover
from, you know, touch wood. I'll tell
you now, when you lift heavy for too
long, your body just hurts. After a big
heavy squat session, like for the next
day, getting out of bed, it's just like,
oh, you know, my knees and my back, it's
just like, you know, I don't want to do
that all the time. And then when I have
these high rep lightweight sets or
sessions, the next day I feel great. I
feel fine. So, having a phase here and
there of the high rep work still
contributes to muscle hypertrophy. It
still contributes indirectly to strength
building, but it unloads your body and
just gives you a damn break, which is my
favorite part, especially for now.
Anyhow, I'm going to get my head on and
I'm going to do one more set in a couple
more minutes.
I held my breath. I held my breath for
the whole set. That one.
Nice work. Nice work, man. Two sets of
15.
Nice party pump. Did I do lat pull downs
in between? I didn't even I just sat
here while I go quickly pump out a few
sets.
Give me a minute. Give me a minute
before my next set. You know, it's super
set, but it doesn't mean you just go
bang bang. I'm going to give myself a
couple of minutes
and I'll do two quick sets of that pull
down. Now, if I'm being honest, I'm not
going to rest the same amount of time.
I'll do a set and I'll wait 5 minutes
and then I'll do another set, then I'm
done. People ask you if you hold your
breath for like more than eight reps,
there should be an answer.
>> Yeah, there's an answer for you. I
always talk about holding your breath
for the whole set. Of course, it comes
with risks. You know, if you've got some
type of a heart condition or something
like that, don't do that. But breath
hold with all heavy lifting is kind of
just like a natural reflex. So, it's
pretty normal. But holding your breath
for multiple sets, multiple reps, this
is the only one that I do that for. I
don't do it for squats or deadlifts.
you'll probably pass out that way. But
here, I can't pass out because I'm
laying down. A lot of the times when you
pass out, the best thing to do is lay on
the floor. Blood goes back to your head
and you'll stand back up. So, if one of
your friends wants to faint, don't be a
good friend and hold them up. You're
doing the worst thing for them. They
want to be laying down and that's how
they're going to wake back up. So, I'm
already laying down in a bench press.
So, I've never passed out doing that.
But the reason why I hold my breath for
that set is because of the position that
I'm in. So, check out this arch. So,
everything's connected. So, I've got my
feet back and heels down. That's called
hip joint extension, which initiates the
arch. I arch as hard as I can, which
helps hold my shoulder blades back and
down. Now, the next thing that is paired
with that is breath hold. So,
inhalation,
exhalation is the opposite to that. When
I exhale, my ribs drop. When my ribs
drop, my upper back goes into well, less
extension, so flexion. And when I flex
my upper back or round my upper back, my
shoulder blades come forward. So every
time you exhale, it makes it just a
little bit more difficult to maintain
that position. Now the next topic of
that position, some people say you
shouldn't be sticking your shoulder
blades. They're designed to move. Like
that's how human bodies move. When we
move our arm, the shoulder blade comes
with it. Yeah. But the bench press, the
way that I'm doing it is a shorter range
of motion. Shoulders back. I'm not
throwing a ball. I'm not pushing out
this way. I'm pushing out this way. It's
a partial range of motion. That's why
competitions bench press. And when I do
that, my shoulder blades don't need to
move that much. If they do, they will.
But the more they move, the more your
shoulder blades protract, the harder it
is because you're laying on a bench to
get them into retraction, which is
exactly where they need to be when you
bring that barbell down to your chest.
Your shoulder blades need to be back.
And if they're not, a lot of the times
that's where people injure their
shoulders or their or they tear their
pecs because they're kind of out of
position and laying on that board is
dysfunctional. So when I say laying on
that board, that bench that's
restricting your shoulder blades from
moving freely. Okay, lat pull downs. So
I did a set. Hey, you know what I'm
going to give you? I'm going to give you
a quick tip for how I get my bench press
position. So check out my back.
So, so this position here, that's
shoulder blades back and down, that that
is the position that I want to be in
when I bench press. Okay? So, when
people think, I don't know what that
position is, think of a lat pull down.
So, imagine imagine you're doing lat
pull down. So, it's not out in front
here. You're pulling it, you're pulling
your shoulder blades back and down to
bring the bar to your chest. Shoulder
blades back and down, arching your upper
back. That's the bottom position for a
lat pull down. And that's the position
that I bench press in. and you should
too if you want a strong bench press.
Anyway, I'm going to do a set. You don't
need to see it. It's pretty boring, but
thanks for the session. I hope you
enjoyed that quick burst of information
and that quick pump of the pecs, which
the chicks love. Just kidding. They
don't care. Shaza, ask her.
>> You absolutely don't care.
>> They don't care about your bench press.
She's lying. They all They all care.
That's all they care about is how big
your bench press is. Anyway, guys, I
hope you care. I'm sure you do. And I'll
see you guys next time.